VPC NAT UI screenshots and Guest cluster using Overlay Networks (#1085)
harvester/docs: docs/networking/kubeovn-vpcnatgateway.md

With the introduction of kubeovn as secondary CNI in Harvester v1.8.0, Outbound and Inbound connectivity for VMs works on subnets created on any custom VPCs using VPC NAT Gateway functionality.

> ### Create a Tenant Network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Tenant Network

1. [Create an overlay network](./harvester-network.md#create-an-overlay-network).

1. [Create a custom VPC](./kubeovn-vpc.md#vpc-settings).

1. [Create a subnet](./kubeovn-vpc.md#subnet-settings) inside the VPC created in the previous step.

    ![](/img/subnetinternal.png)

    :::info important

    When creating a subnet for a tenant network, ensure DHCP is enabled, `dns_server` is set to `8.8.8.8`, and `natOutgoing` is set to `true`. This configuration ensures that a default route is installed and DNS is resolved on virtual machines attached to these subnets.

    :::

1. [Create an external network](./kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration).

The examples in this document use the following settings:

- **Overlay network**: `vswitchinternal`
- **VPC**: `commonvpc`
- **Subnet (in `commonvpc`)**: `subnetinternal`
```

Reviewer: Replace the current segmented structure with ordered steps.

![](/img/subnetinternal.png)

:::info important

When creating a subnet for tenant network, make sure to enable DHCP and set `dns_server=8.8.8.8` and `natOutgoing` as `true`.
This will make sure to install default route and resolve dns on the VMs which are using these subnets.

:::

### Create an External Network

Follow the instructions in [Pure Underlay Networking](./kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration) to create an external network.

### VPC NAT Gateway

#### Create the vpc nat gateway config

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Gateways**.

    ![](/img/vpc-nat-config.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the vpc nat gw.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Internal Tenant Network**: Name of the internal tenant network(`vswitchinternal`)

    - **VPC** VPC of the internal tenant network subnet (`commonvpc`)

    - **Subnet**: subnet of the internal tenant network (`subnetinternal`)

    - **LAN IP**: Gw Ip of the internal tenant network

1. On the **External Subnets** tab, configure the following settings:

>     - **Subnet**: subnet of the underlay external network(`subnetexternal`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify a unique name for the VPC NAT gateway.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Internal Tenant Network**: Name of the internal tenant network (for example, `vswitchinternal`)

    - **VPC** VPC of the internal tenant network subnet (for example, `commonvpc`)

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the internal tenant network (for example, `subnetinternal`)

    - **LAN IP**: Gateway IP address of the internal tenant network

1. On the **External Subnets** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)
```

With the introduction of kubeovn as secondary CNI in Harvester v1.8.0, Outbound and Inbound connectivity for VMs works on subnets created on any custom VPCs using VPC NAT Gateway functionality.

### Create a Tenant Network

1. [Create an overlay network](./harvester-network.md#create-an-overlay-network).

1. [Create a custom VPC](./kubeovn-vpc.md#vpc-settings).

1. [Create a subnet](./kubeovn-vpc.md#subnet-settings) inside the VPC created in the previous step.

    ![](/img/subnetinternal.png)

    :::info important

>     When creating a subnet for a tenant network, ensure DHCP is enabled, `dns_server` is set to `8.8.8.8`, and `natOutgoing` is set to `true`. This configuration ensures that a default route is installed and DNS is resolved on virtual machines attached to these subnets.

Reviewer 2: Ditto

>     When creating a subnet for a tenant network, ensure DHCP is enabled, `dns_server` is set to `8.8.8.8`, and `natOutgoing` is set to `true`. This configuration ensures that a default route is installed and DNS is resolved on virtual machines attached to these subnets.

Reviewer 2: Ditto

    :::

The examples in this document use the following settings:

- **Overlay network**: `vswitchinternal`
- **VPC**: `commonvpc`
- **Subnet (in `commonvpc`)**: `subnetinternal`

### Create an External Network

  Follow [underlay network](./kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration) to create an external network.

### VPC NAT Gateway

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Gateways**.

    ![](/img/vpc-nat-config.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the VPC NAT gateway.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Internal Tenant Network**: Name of the internal tenant network (for example, `vswitchinternal`)

    - **VPC** VPC of the internal tenant network subnet (for example, `commonvpc`)

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the internal tenant network (for example, `subnetinternal`)

    - **LAN IP**: Gateway IP address of the internal tenant network

1. On the **External Subnets** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Verify if a new vpcnatgw statefulset and a pod created

    ```

>     kubectl get statefulset -n kube-system vpc-nat-gw-gw1 -o yaml

Reviewer 2: Please prepend each command with a `$ ` prompt to clearly distinguish executable commands from their output.

            env:
            - name: GATEWAY_V4
              value: 10.115.55.254
            - name: GATEWAY_V6
            image: docker.io/kubeovn/vpc-nat-gateway:v1.16.1
            imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
            lifecycle:
              postStart:
                exec:
                  command:
                  - sh
                  - -c
                  - sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
            name: vpc-nat-gw
            resources: {}
            securityContext:
              allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
              privileged: true
            terminationMessagePath: /dev/termination-log
            terminationMessagePolicy: File
          dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
          restartPolicy: Always
          schedulerName: default-scheduler
          securityContext: {}
          terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      updateStrategy:
        type: RollingUpdate
    status:
      availableReplicas: 1
      collisionCount: 0
      currentReplicas: 1
      currentRevision: vpc-nat-gw-gw1-5659bc556b
      observedGeneration: 1
      readyReplicas: 1
      replicas: 1
      updateRevision: vpc-nat-gw-gw1-5659bc556b
      updatedReplicas: 1
    ```
    ```

>     kubectl describe pod vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0 -n kube-system

Reviewer 2: Ditto

        Environment:
          GATEWAY_V4:  10.115.55.254
          GATEWAY_V6:
        Mounts:
          /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount from kube-api-access-97xmd (ro)
    Conditions:
      Type                        Status
      PodReadyToStartContainers   True
      Initialized                 True
      Ready                       True
      ContainersReady             True
      PodScheduled                True
    Volumes:
      kube-api-access-97xmd:
        Type:                    Projected (a volume that contains injected data from multiple sources)
        TokenExpirationSeconds:  3607
        ConfigMapName:           kube-root-ca.crt
        Optional:                false
        DownwardAPI:             true
    QoS Class:                   BestEffort
    Node-Selectors:              <none>
    Tolerations:                 node.kubernetes.io/not-ready:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
                                 node.kubernetes.io/unreachable:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
    Events:                      <none>
    ```

1. Check the vpc nat gw pod for interfaces (net1 attached to internal network, net2 attached to external network)

    ```

>     kubectl exec -it vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0 -n kube-system -- /bin/bash

Reviewer 2: Ditto

           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet6 fe80::2002:d9ff:fe04:e7bb/64 scope link proto kernel_ll
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    9730: net2@if9731: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default
        link/ether c6:1d:c3:e8:a5:76 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
        inet 10.115.48.6/21 brd 10.115.55.255 scope global net2
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet 10.115.55.200/21 scope global secondary net2
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet6 fe80::c41d:c3ff:fee8:a576/64 scope link proto kernel_ll
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# ip route show
    default via 10.115.55.254 dev net2 onlink
    10.55.0.0/16 via 172.20.10.1 dev net1
    10.115.48.0/21 dev net2 proto kernel scope link src 10.115.48.6
    169.254.1.1 dev eth0 scope link
    172.20.10.0/24 dev net1 proto kernel scope link src 172.20.10.1
    172.30.0.0/24 via 172.20.10.1 dev net1
    ```

1. Verify provider network bridge (br-pn1) and external subnet attached on the ovs (patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int)

    ```

>     kubectl exec -it ovs-ovn-q92zk -n kube-system -- /bin/bash

Reviewer 2: Ditto

                Interface "6159403e_net2_h"
        ovs_version: "3.5.3"
    ```

### SNAT for external connectivity from Overlay VMs

1. Create EIP

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > External IPs**.

        ![](/img/eip.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the external IP.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **VPC NAT GW**: Name of the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `gw1`)

       - **External Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)

       - **v4 IP**: Available IP address from the external subnet CIDR range to be used as a public IP for SNAT/DNAT

   1. Click **Create**.

1. Create an SNAT Rule

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Source Rules**.

       ![](/img/snat.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the SNAT rule.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **EIP**: External IP (for example, `my-eip`)

       - **Internal CIDR**: CIDR of the internal tenant subnet

   1. Click **Create**.

1. Verify the status of the external IP.

    ```

>     kubectl get eip

Reviewer 2: Ditto

    NAME     IP              MAC                 NAT         NATGWDP   READY
    my-eip   10.115.55.200   52:1b:4f:1d:14:ce   dnat,snat   gw1       true

    ```

> 1. Verify that the SNAT filter rule was created in the iptables of the VPC NAT gateway pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the SNAT rule was created in the iptables of the VPC NAT gateway pod.
```

    Example:
    
    ```
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# iptables-legacy-save -t nat
    # Generated by iptables-save v1.8.11 on Sat Mar  7 00:28:34 2026
    *nat
    :PREROUTING ACCEPT [2949:373475]
    :INPUT ACCEPT [107:31097]
    :OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [1:60]
    :DNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_DNAT - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_DNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    -A PREROUTING -j DNAT_FILTER
    -A POSTROUTING -j SNAT_FILTER
    -A SHARED_SNAT -s 172.20.10.0/24 -o net2 -j SNAT --to-source 10.115.55.200 --random-fully
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j EXCLUSIVE_SNAT
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j SHARED_SNAT
    COMMIT

>     ```

Reviewer 2: I don't think users should need to verify these details as part of the normal workflow. Perhaps this step would fit better as an advanced tip. WDYT?

Author: Yeah added them as separate heading for verification and example

### Create a Virtual Machine

[Create a virtual machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) and attach it to the `vswitchinternal` overlay network.

> Ping from VM (inside guest os) to 8.8.8.8 must be successful

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ping from VM (inside guest os) to any IP address external to the cluster, such as 8.8.8.8, must be successful
```

The traffic from VM reaches net1 of vpc nat gw pod and with route installed egress out of net2 and hits the iptable rule for SNAT and translates 172.20.10.0/24 subnet ip to 10.115.55.200 for external connectivity.

![](/img/kubeovnSNATFlow.png)

### DNAT for inbound access (external to overlay Virtual Machines)

1. Create a DNAT Rule

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Destination Rules**.

       ![](/img/dnat.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the DNAT rule.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **EIP**: External IP assigned to the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `my-eip`)

       - **External Port**: Port on which incoming traffic is received from external clients

       - **Internal IP**: Destination IP address to which incoming traffic is forwarded (the IP address of the target overlay virtual machine)

       - **Internal Port**: Destination port on the internal host to which incoming traffic is translated and forwarded

       - **Protocol** `TCP` or `UDP`

   1. Click **Create**.

> 1. Verify that the DNAT filter iptables rule exists inside the VPC NAT gateway pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the DNAT iptables rule exists inside the VPC NAT gateway pod.
```

With the introduction of kubeovn as secondary CNI in Harvester v1.8.0, Outbound and Inbound connectivity for VMs works on subnets created on any custom VPCs using VPC NAT Gateway functionality.

### Create a Tenant Network

1. [Create an overlay network](./harvester-network.md#create-an-overlay-network).

1. [Create a custom VPC](./kubeovn-vpc.md#vpc-settings).

1. [Create a subnet](./kubeovn-vpc.md#subnet-settings) inside the VPC created in the previous step.

    ![](/img/subnetinternal.png)

    :::info important

    When creating a subnet for a tenant network, ensure DHCP is enabled, `dns_server` is set to a valid DNS server IP address (for example, `8.8.8.8`), and `natOutgoing` is set to `true`. This configuration ensures that a default route is installed and DNS is resolved on virtual machines attached to these subnets.

    :::

The examples in this document use the following settings:

- **Overlay network**: `vswitchinternal`
- **VPC**: `commonvpc`
- **Subnet (in `commonvpc`)**: `subnetinternal`

### Create an External Network

>   Follow [underlay network](./kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration) to create an external network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the instructions in [Underlay Configuration](./kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration) to create an external network.
```

### VPC NAT Gateway

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Gateways**.

    ![](/img/vpc-nat-config.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the VPC NAT gateway.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Internal Tenant Network**: Name of the internal tenant network (for example, `vswitchinternal`)

    - **VPC** VPC of the internal tenant network subnet (for example, `commonvpc`)

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the internal tenant network (for example, `subnetinternal`)

    - **LAN IP**: Gateway IP address of the internal tenant network

1. On the **External Subnets** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)

1. Click **Create**.

#### Verification and Example Outputs

> 1. Verify if a new vpcnatgw statefulset and a pod created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Verification and Sample Outputs

1. Verify that a new StatefulSet (`vpc-nat-gw`) and associated pod were created.
```

          Started:      Fri, 05 Jun 2026 22:42:29 +0000
        Ready:          True
        Restart Count:  0
        Environment:
          GATEWAY_V4:  10.115.55.254
          GATEWAY_V6:
        Mounts:
          /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount from kube-api-access-97xmd (ro)
    Conditions:
      Type                        Status
      PodReadyToStartContainers   True
      Initialized                 True
      Ready                       True
      ContainersReady             True
      PodScheduled                True
    Volumes:
      kube-api-access-97xmd:
        Type:                    Projected (a volume that contains injected data from multiple sources)
        TokenExpirationSeconds:  3607
        ConfigMapName:           kube-root-ca.crt
        Optional:                false
        DownwardAPI:             true
    QoS Class:                   BestEffort
    Node-Selectors:              <none>
    Tolerations:                 node.kubernetes.io/not-ready:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
                                 node.kubernetes.io/unreachable:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
    Events:                      <none>
    ```

> 1. Check the vpc nat gw pod for interfaces (net1 attached to internal network, net2 attached to external network)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the network interfaces of the `vpc-nat-gw` pod are attached correctly (`net1` to the internal network and `net2` to the external network).
```

        link/ether 22:02:d9:04:e7:bb brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
        inet 172.20.10.1/24 brd 172.20.10.255 scope global net1
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet6 fe80::2002:d9ff:fe04:e7bb/64 scope link proto kernel_ll
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    9730: net2@if9731: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default
        link/ether c6:1d:c3:e8:a5:76 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
        inet 10.115.48.6/21 brd 10.115.55.255 scope global net2
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet 10.115.55.200/21 scope global secondary net2
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet6 fe80::c41d:c3ff:fee8:a576/64 scope link proto kernel_ll
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# ip route show
    default via 10.115.55.254 dev net2 onlink
    10.55.0.0/16 via 172.20.10.1 dev net1
    10.115.48.0/21 dev net2 proto kernel scope link src 10.115.48.6
    169.254.1.1 dev eth0 scope link
    172.20.10.0/24 dev net1 proto kernel scope link src 172.20.10.1
    172.30.0.0/24 via 172.20.10.1 dev net1
    ```

> 1. Verify provider network bridge (br-pn1) and external subnet attached on the ovs (patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the provider network bridge (`br-pn1`) is present and that the patch port (`patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int`) connects the external subnet to `br-int`.
```

                Interface patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int
                    type: patch
                    options: {peer=patch-br-int-to-localnet.subnetexternal}
            Port eno50
                trunks: [0, 2017]
                Interface eno50
        Bridge br-int
            fail_mode: secure
            datapath_type: system
            Port br-int
                Interface br-int
                    type: internal
            Port "6159403e_net1_h"
                Interface "6159403e_net1_h"
            Port mirror0
                Interface mirror0
                    type: internal
            Port ovn0
                Interface ovn0
                    type: internal
            Port patch-br-int-to-localnet.subnetexternal
                Interface patch-br-int-to-localnet.subnetexternal
                    type: patch
                    options: {peer=patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int}
            Port "7e8b0_37a8eec_h"
                Interface "7e8b0_37a8eec_h"
            Port "6159403e_net2_h"
                Interface "6159403e_net2_h"
        ovs_version: "3.5.3"
    ```

### SNAT for external connectivity from Overlay VMs

> 1. Create EIP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SNAT for External Connectivity from Overlay VMs

1. Create an external IP.
```

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > External IPs**.

        ![](/img/eip.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the external IP.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **VPC NAT GW**: Name of the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `gw1`)

       - **External Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)

       - **v4 IP**: Available IP address from the external subnet CIDR range to be used as a public IP for SNAT/DNAT

   1. Click **Create**.

> 1. Create an SNAT Rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an SNAT rule.
```

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Source Rules**.

       ![](/img/snat.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the SNAT rule.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **EIP**: External IP (for example, `my-eip`)

       - **Internal CIDR**: CIDR of the internal tenant subnet

   1. Click **Create**.

> #### Verification and Example Outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Verification and Sample Outputs
```

    my-eip   10.115.55.200   52:1b:4f:1d:14:ce   dnat,snat   gw1       true

    ```

1. Verify that the SNAT rule was created in the iptables of the VPC NAT gateway pod.

    Example:
    
    ```
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# iptables-legacy-save -t nat
    # Generated by iptables-save v1.8.11 on Sat Mar  7 00:28:34 2026
    *nat
    :PREROUTING ACCEPT [2949:373475]
    :INPUT ACCEPT [107:31097]
    :OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [1:60]
    :DNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_DNAT - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_DNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    -A PREROUTING -j DNAT_FILTER
    -A POSTROUTING -j SNAT_FILTER
    -A SHARED_SNAT -s 172.20.10.0/24 -o net2 -j SNAT --to-source 10.115.55.200 --random-fully
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j EXCLUSIVE_SNAT
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j SHARED_SNAT
    COMMIT
    ```

### Create a Virtual Machine

[Create a virtual machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) and attach it to the `vswitchinternal` overlay network.

Ping from VM (inside guest os) to any IP address external to the cluster, such as 8.8.8.8 must be successful

> The traffic from VM reaches net1 of vpc nat gw pod and with route installed egress out of net2 and hits the iptable rule for SNAT and translates 172.20.10.0/24 subnet ip to 10.115.55.200 for external connectivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Create a virtual machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) and attach it to the `vswitchinternal` overlay network.

1. From within the virtual machine's guest operating system, ping an external IP address (for example, 8.8.8.8). The ping must succeed.

Traffic leaving the virtual machine enters the `vpc-nat-gw` pod on interface`net1` and routes out through interface `net2`. An iptables SNAT rule translates the source IP from the internal subnet (`172.20.10.0/24`) to the external IP (`10.115.55.200`) for external connectivity.
```

![](/img/kubeovnSNATFlow.png)

> ### DNAT for inbound access (external to overlay Virtual Machines)
> 
> 1. Create a DNAT Rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### DNAT Rules for Inbound Access (External to Overlay Virtual Machines)

Create a DNAT rule by performing the following steps:
```

   1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Destination Rules**.

       ![](/img/dnat.png)

   1. Click **Create**.

   1. Specify a unique name for the DNAT rule.

   1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

       - **EIP**: External IP assigned to the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `my-eip`)

       - **External Port**: Port on which incoming traffic is received from external clients

       - **Internal IP**: Destination IP address to which incoming traffic is forwarded (the IP address of the target overlay virtual machine)

       - **Internal Port**: Destination port on the internal host to which incoming traffic is translated and forwarded

       - **Protocol** `TCP` or `UDP`

   1. Click **Create**.

> #### Verification and Example Outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Verification and Sample Outputs
```

> 1. Verify that the DNAT iptables rule exists inside the VPC NAT gateway pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify that the DNAT iptables rule exists inside the VPC NAT gateway pod.
```

        Port ovn0
            Interface ovn0
                type: internal
        Port patch-br-int-to-localnet.subnetexternal
            Interface patch-br-int-to-localnet.subnetexternal
                type: patch
                options: {peer=patch-localnet.subnetexternal-to-br-int}
        Port "7e8b0_37a8eec_h"
            Interface "7e8b0_37a8eec_h"
        Port "6159403e_net2_h"
            Interface "6159403e_net2_h"
    ovs_version: "3.5.3"
```

### SNAT for external connectivity from Overlay VMs

> #### Create EIP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SNAT Rules for Outbound Access (Overlay to External Networks)

#### Create an External IP
```

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > External IPs**.

    ![](/img/eip.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the eip.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **VPC NAT GW**: Name of the vpc nat gw(`gw1`)

    - **External Subnet** subnet of the underlay external network (`subnetexternal`)

>     - **v4 IP**: choose an IP address from external subnet CIDR Range to be used as public IP for SNAT/DNAT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify a unique name for the external IP.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **VPC NAT GW**: Name of the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `gw1`)

    - **External Subnet**: Subnet of the underlay external network (for example, `subnetexternal`)

    - **v4 IP**: Available IP address from the external subnet CIDR range to be used as a public IP for SNAT/DNAT

1. Click **Create**.
```

1. Click **Create**.

> #### Create SNAT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create an SNAT Rule
```

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Source Rules**.

    ![](/img/snat.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the snat.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **EIP**: Name of the eip(`my-eip`)

>     - **Internal CIDR** `cidr` of the internal tenant subnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify a unique name for the SNAT rule.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **EIP**: External IP (for example, `my-eip`)

    - **Internal CIDR**: CIDR of the internal tenant subnet
```

1. Click **Create**.

####  Verify EIP status
```
kubectl get eip
NAME     IP              MAC                 NAT         NATGWDP   READY
my-eip   10.115.55.200   52:1b:4f:1d:14:ce   dnat,snat   gw1       true

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Verify the status of the external IP.

    ```
    kubectl get eip
    NAME     IP              MAC                 NAT         NATGWDP   READY
    my-eip   10.115.55.200   52:1b:4f:1d:14:ce   dnat,snat   gw1       true

    ```
````

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Verify that the SNAT filter rule was created in the iptables of the VPC NAT gateway pod.

    Example:
    
    ```
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# iptables-legacy-save -t nat
    # Generated by iptables-save v1.8.11 on Sat Mar  7 00:28:34 2026
    *nat
    :PREROUTING ACCEPT [2949:373475]
    :INPUT ACCEPT [107:31097]
    :OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [1:60]
    :DNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_DNAT - [0:0]
    :EXCLUSIVE_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_DNAT - [0:0]
    :SHARED_SNAT - [0:0]
    :SNAT_FILTER - [0:0]
    -A PREROUTING -j DNAT_FILTER
    -A POSTROUTING -j SNAT_FILTER
    -A SHARED_SNAT -s 172.20.10.0/24 -o net2 -j SNAT --to-source 10.115.55.200 --random-fully
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j EXCLUSIVE_SNAT
    -A SNAT_FILTER -j SHARED_SNAT
    COMMIT
    ```
````

### Create a VM

> See [Create a Virtual Machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) to create a VM and attach it to the `vswitchinternal` overlay network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Virtual Machine

[Create a virtual machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) and attach it to the `vswitchinternal` overlay network.
```

Ping from VM (inside guest os) to 8.8.8.8 must be successful
The traffic from VM reaches net1 of vpc nat gw pod and with route installed egress out of net2 and hits the iptable rule for SNAT and translates 172.20.10.0/24 subnet ip to 10.115.55.200 for external connectivity.

![](/img/kubeovnSNATFlow.png)

### DNAT for inbound access (external to overlay VMs)

> #### Create DNAT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### DNAT Rules for Inbound Access (External to Overlay Virtual Machines)

#### Create a DNAT Rule
```

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Overlay Networks > NAT & Internet > Destination Rules**.

    ![](/img/dnat.png)

1. Click **Create**.

1. Specify a unique name for the dnat.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **EIP**: Name of the eip(`my-eip`) same used for `snat`

    - **External Port** The port on which incoming traffic is received from external clients.

    - **Internal IP** The destination IP address to which the incoming traffic is forwarded.(IP address of the overlay VM)

    - **Internal Port** The destination port on the internal host to which the incoming traffic is translated and forwarded.

>     - **Protocol** tcp or udp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify a unique name for the DNAT rule.

1. On the **Basic** tab, configure the following settings:

    - **EIP**: External IP assigned to the VPC NAT gateway (for example, `my-eip`)

    - **External Port**: Port on which incoming traffic is received from external clients

    - **Internal IP**: Destination IP address to which incoming traffic is forwarded (the IP address of the target overlay virtual machine)

    - **Internal Port**: Destination port on the internal host to which incoming traffic is translated and forwarded

    - **Protocol** `TCP` or `UDP`
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Verify that the DNAT filter iptables rule exists inside the VPC NAT gateway pod.

    Example: 
    ```
    vpc-nat-gw-gw1-0:/kube-ovn# iptables-legacy -t nat -L -n -v 2>/dev/null | grep -E "DNAT"
    3051  392K DNAT_FILTER  all  --  *      *       0.0.0.0/0            0.0.0.0/0           
    Chain DNAT_FILTER (1 references)
    3051  392K EXCLUSIVE_DNAT  all  --  *      *       0.0.0.0/0            0.0.0.0/0           
    3051  392K SHARED_DNAT  all  --  *      *       0.0.0.0/0            0.0.0.0/0           
    Chain EXCLUSIVE_DNAT (1 references)
    Chain SHARED_DNAT (1 references)
        1    60 DNAT       tcp  --  *      *       0.0.0.0/0            10.115.55.200        tcp dpt:8888 to:172.20.10.2:80

    ```
````

### Create a VM

> See [Create a Virtual Machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) to create a VM attached to overlay network on `subnetinternal` and Install nginx on VM to check inbound access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a Virtual Machine

[Create a virtual machine](../vm/create-vm.md#how-to-create-a-vm) attached to the overlay network on `subnetinternal`, then install NGINX on the virtual machine to verify inbound connectivity.
```
